Tonight on
The Secret Life of the Brain...
"The Teenage Brain"--
vulnerable to
the dangers of drugs...
I'm an addict and I need...
I need help.
And the chaos of schizophrenia.
MAN:
I spent 19 years
with the same personality
and all of a sudden
it was taken away.
Tonight, "The Teenage Brain."
[Captioning sponsored by WNET]
Major funding for
The Secret Life of the Brain
is provided by
the National Science Foundation
America's investment
in the future.
Funding is also provided by...
At Pfizer, we're spending
nearly $5 billion
looking for the cures
of the future.
We have 12,000 scientists
and health experts
who firmly believe the only
thing incurable is our passion.
The Medtronic Foundation,
on behalf of Medtronic
providing lifelong solutions
for people with chronic disease.
The Park Foundation,
dedicated to education
and quality television.
The Corporation
for Public Broadcasting
and by contributions
to your PBS station from:
( techno dance music playing )
NARRATOR:
"I felt a cleaving in my mind
as if my brain had split.
"I tried to match it seam by
seam but could not make them fit
"The thought behind, I strove
to join unto the thought before
but sequence raveled out of
sound like balls upon a floor."
The teenage brain.
By the second decade of life,
the human brain is full-size,
its billions of neurons
all in place.
But it is not yet finished.
MAN:
The brain is a work in progress
and adolescence is
the last great time
of enormous brain change
and brain development.
NARRATOR:
Now the drama
of brain development focuses
on the part of the brain
that makes us uniquely human:
the still-maturing
prefrontal cortex.
MAN:
The prefrontal cortex is
a part of the brain
that allows us
to make future plans,
and that's involved in
such highly abstract areas
as personal responsibility,
morality and self-control.
This part of the brain
is undergoing
this major, major step in
maturation during adolescence.
( techno dance music playing )
NARRATOR:
With the part of the brain
responsible for reason,
judgment and self-discipline
still developing,
it is no wonder
that the teenage years can be
a time of turmoil and confusion.
WOMAN:
The adolescent's brain is clumsy
because all of a sudden there's
these new parts of their brain
that are on-line,
that are doing tasks
and they're getting used to it.
They are trying to figure out
"Okay, I've got a frontal
cortex; what do I do with it?"
NARRATOR:
The developing teenage brain
is in flux,
shaping personality, behavior,
even identity itself.
As the brain matures,
the teenager also faces
special risks
from addictive drugs and alcohol
that can hijack the brain
to the chaos of schizophrenia
that strikes most often
during adolescence.
NARRATOR:
Sometimes the teenage brain
fails in ways
that challenge even our
most advanced understanding
of how it works.
Two years ago Courtney Hale-Cook
was a senior in high school
when he was struck by
schizophrenia, a brain disease
to which adolescents
are particularly vulnerable.
HALE-COOK:
You know, I spent...
up to that point I had spent
19 years, you know,
with virtually
the same personality
and I was very accustomed to it,
and I liked it.
I liked being me, you know?
And all of a sudden
it was taken away.
He would come up to me
and he would say,
"Mom, you look like
a really old lady today."
And he said... he would point
to my eyes and he'd say,
"You have a black hole here
and a black hole there."
Or he would describe things
as going into tunnel vision
so that everything else is black
except what was in that
small tunnel at the end.
When he would open his eyes
in the morning
he would see gnats,
he would see sparkles.
Not even with the first
thought of the day,
just the minute
the eyes were open,
he would have all these
visual disturbances.
HALE-COOK:
They're... they're usually
in the very... center
of my vision.
Uh... uh...
But it varies, uh...
Like... like now they're kind
of just wherever I see the sky.
Uh... You know, they're...
They're still there.
I think it took him
a number of weeks to come to me
and say, "You know, Mom,
I've seen this in psych class
"and, Mom, I'm really...
I'm really terrified.
I'm really scared
that I have schizophrenia."
I felt like I was going crazy.
And, uh... you know, I felt
like "I'm going to be crazy
for the rest of my life."
It's hard for me to imagine
a disease that is crueler
than schizophrenia.
I mean, when does it begin?
You know, in late adolescence
and early 20s,
just when a family and society
have their maximal investment
in a young person,
just when, you know,
they're about to graduate
high school or college
and this child is lost
in the most awful way.
NARRATOR:
At the University of Iowa,
Courtney is part of a research
study that is investigating
how schizophrenic brains
function, and malfunction.
We'll put
the bonnet on.
There you go.
NARRATOR:
Schizophrenia is as complex
as the brain itself,
and clues to its biology have
been stubbornly elusive.
MAN:
Well, schizophrenia is
definitely an enigma.
It's never been possible
to identify
an obvious
disease-related feature
that distinguished schizophrenia
from all other conditions.
You look at a brain
of a patient with schizophrenia
under a microscope,
you don't see anything
that would make you say,
"Aha, this is a disorder
of these cells or those cells."
NARRATOR:
What has gone wrong
inside the brain of someone
suffering from schizophrenia?
For centuries, the answer
has eluded researchers.
But new imaging technologies
have revealed
how the brain fails
to function properly...
focusing attention on several
different brain regions
that are underperforming,
regions responsible
for thinking and reasoning,
memory and emotion.
The fact that so many regions
are malfunctioning
has led researchers to
investigate a part of the brain
which coordinates
their operation:
the prefrontal cortex.
WEINBERGER:
There's certainly
a lot of evidence
that the prefrontal
cortex functions
like the conductor
in an orchestra
and that it maintains
a harmony and it makes music
out of many, many disparate
elements of this orchestration
and that we think
that part of the problem
when the frontal cortex
is deficient--
as it may be in schizophrenia--
is that instead of music,
there's noise.
One of the things
that happened to me was
that I was constantly,
like, stupefied and, uh...
I do have a little bit
of trouble, uh...
uh, staying coherent,
uh, staying, uh... to one
particular subject, uh...
you know, because my mind is
somewhere else.
WOMAN:
This time
I want you
to tell me the color
of the ink.
Ignore what
the word says
and tell me the ink--
red, blue, brown.
Okay?
All right.
As quickly as you can.
Ready... go.
Red, blue, brown, red, green,
blue, brown, brown...
NARRATOR:
A poorly functioning prefrontal
cortex makes thinking difficult.
It is no surprise that many
people with schizophrenia
don't perform well on a series
of tests designed to measure
their ability
to think and reason clearly.
Courtney was once
a good student,
but as the disease progressed,
his grades began to drop,
and he finally had to
put off plans for college.
WOMAN:
Schizophrenia is a disease
that affects the highest
human functions,
the parts of us that are
most evolutionarily advanced:
our ability to think
at high conceptual levels.
NARRATOR:
Scientists had once hoped
that MRI images of the brain
would help solve
the mysteries of schizophrenia
by identifying damage
to specific brain structures.
Instead, the images revealed
a new mystery.
WEINBERGER:
We were surprised to see
that there was no obvious
"hole in the head."
But what there was, was that
the ventricles of the brain--
which are these centers
in the brain
that have spinal fluid, water
in them that are just cavities--
were slightly bigger
in patients with schizophrenia.
NARRATOR:
Why were the ventricles--
reservoirs of fluid that cushion
the brain's delicate tissue--
larger in schizophrenia?
The oversized ventricles
proved to be evidence
that other areas of the brain
were smaller.
WEINBERGER:
Your skull is made of hard bones
that does not expand.
So if the ventricles--
these cavities-- got bigger,
the only way all this
could stay inside your skull
was that something else
had to get smaller.
And there have been a lot
of studies subsequently
showing that there is
a slight, very slight, thinning
of the surface
of the brain, the cortex,
probably that accounts for
these changes in the ventricles.
NARRATOR:
Once again, evidence pointed
to a connection
between damage in the prefrontal
cortex and schizophrenia,
which may help explain
why the disease appears
most often during adolescence.
( a cappella ):
[music] How can I trust you [music]
[music] when I know
what you've done? [music]
[music] Baby, please believe
that all that is done. [music]
[music] If I decide
to go along... [music]
[music] I promise I won't
do you wrong. [music]
NARRATOR:
Researchers are now looking
more closely
at developments in
the normal adolescent brain
for clues to what might trigger
the onset of schizophrenia.
MAN:
The adolescent brain is far more
flexible, far more adaptable
than we had ever
realized before.
There's enormous potential
for change,
and not just change in sort
of psychological dimensions
but actually physical,
anatomical changes.
NARRATOR:
At the beginning of adolescence,
the prefrontal cortex goes
through a burst of growth
as neurons reach out
to connect to other neurons,
much as they do throughout the
brain during early childhood.
And just as in children,
the connections between neurons
in the teenage brain
grow stronger, or they are
pruned back and wither away.
GIEDD:
It's sort of nature's way
of making sure
that the connections that do
survive are hardy and robust.
( saxophone playing )
One of the ways the brain
seems to try to figure out
which connections to keep
and which ones
to eliminate or prune
is based on the activities
of the teen.
( playing continues )
The brain is searching for "What
am I going to need to be good at
to survive in this environment?"
And the way that it figures that
out is "What am I doing now?"
( band playing jazz piece )
( techno dance music playing )
WEINBERGER:
Adolescence
could be characterized
as a stressful time
for the brain.
There are chemical changes,
hormonal changes,
anatomical changes,
changes in the expression
of genes inside of cells.
It's a time
of great biological tumult.
And the frontal lobe is fighting
to adapt to the environment,
to deal with all these
inner instinctual surges.
It's difficult with
a frontal lobe that's normal
to make it through adolescence.
But we believe that patients
with schizophrenia
don't have
a frontal lobe that's normal.
We believe
it didn't develop normally
probably from early in life.
NARRATOR:
Are there clues to schizophrenia
in childhood that may explain
the brain's later failure
during adolescence?
Can the child's brain
be hiding within it
the seeds of
its own later malfunction?
Psychologist Elaine Walker is
trying to answer those questions
by examining the home movies
of children who later
developed schizophrenia.
WALKER:
We were looking for evidence
that there was some abnormality
in brain function
and of course one
of the best places
to look for that
in young children
is in their motor development.
This child only uses one hand
to try to catch the ball.
This child is showing
some unusual posturing
of his left hand,
hyperextension of his fingers.
Normal children develop crawling
in a symmetric fashion.
This is a very asymmetric
crawling pattern,
and that is another
characteristic that we observed
more often in the children who
later developed schizophrenia.
NARRATOR:
Walker's observations cannot be
used to predict schizophrenia.
Although
these eccentric movements
appear more frequently
in children
who eventually develop
the disease,
they can be found
in normal children as well.
But Walker's study is consistent
with the theory
that schizophrenia is caused
by events
in early brain development
even perhaps
just months after conception.
As neurons are born, take their
place in the developing brain
and then join one another
in an intricate network
of connections,
scientists see
the possibility for error.
The genetic make-up
of the brain itself,
poor nutrition during pregnancy,
or a viral infection
all may have
devastating effects.
Whatever the cause,
scientists speculate
the damage lies dormant
until adolescence,
when the prefrontal cortex goes
through its final maturation.
HYMAN:
Schizophrenia could be
a disease in which
this last developmental stage
has run amok
and we end up literally with the
wrong connections in the brain.
WOMAN:
Courtney, we're going to bring
a monitor over in front of you
that you'll be viewing
throughout the study.
HALE-COOK:
Okay.
NARRATOR:
Schizophrenia disrupts not only
the thinking parts of the brain
but it can also have a severe
impact on the emotions.
WOMAN:
Courtney, next
you'll be viewing some slides
that most people find to be
pleasant or positive in content.
Just relax and watch...
NARRATOR:
To probe the emotional regions
of the brain,
researchers flash a series
of pictures on a screen
and use advanced
imaging technologies
to watch the brain's response.
The normal brain responds
to these stimulating images
by activating regions of
the brain that process emotions.
These same regions
respond poorly
in many people
with schizophrenia.
ANDREASEN:
People with schizophrenia
will very often say,
"I've lost the capacity
"to feel related
to other people in the world
or even related
to the world at all."
It's both
an intellectual emptiness
and an emotional emptiness
and it's one of the factors that
drives people with schizophrenia
to feel like taking their lives,
to feel like committing suicide
because they... they feel as
if they've lost... themselves.
HALE-COOK:
The thing that really crushed me
was the lack of motivation,
uh, the negative symptoms
of schizophrenia,
uh, the flat affect, the, uh...
the emotionlessness, the apathy.
Uh, those were the things
that really got to me.
He would talk frequently about
not being able to feel anything.
He could feel no sorrow.
He could feel no joy.
There was just nothing there--
no sorrow, just empty.
That's what he would describe,
just... empty and black.
HALE-COOK:
I, uh...
didn't want to live the life
that I'd been given anymore.
It was so contrary
to what I wanted, uh...
that I didn't want it anymore.
MAN:
When I heard that Courtney
had attempted suicide,
I was not surprised.
He had talked about it,
he has had ideas about suicide
and he's one of those
individuals that understands
he has an illness and
it's not likely to go away.
That he hadn't succeeded
was perhaps
what surprised me the most,
because he succeeds
in most things
that he's done in life
up to the schizophrenia.
HALE-COOK:
I wrote in my suicide note
that "Why take death seriously
if the quality of life is poor?"
And, uh... that thought really
stuck with me for a long time.
NARRATOR:
While schizophrenia has stolen
Courtney's emotional life,
other teenagers
with schizophrenia suffer
from hallucinations as well,
frightening visions
and voices that do not exist.
YOUNG WOMAN:
"June 17, 2000.
"Dear Diary: It's been strange.
"It wasn't a good day.
"I'm so depressed,
I hate myself.
"Things would be better
if... well, you know.
"Got to go now.
Love, Sabrina Yeskel."
NARRATOR:
Sabrina Yeskel was
an excited 12-year-old
when she first went off
to sleep-away camp.
Once there,
she began to hear voices.
YESKEL:
They were loud.
The tone of voice was
a deep, heavy-set voice.
They've said to kill yourself.
They've said
I'm not worth living.
NARRATOR:
Sabrina's mother rushed to camp,
but barely recognized
her daughter.
MOTHER:
She started screaming, "Stop."
And I said, "What, Sabrina,
what's... what's going on?"
She said,
"He's trying to kill me."
So I pulled off the road
and tried to hold her and
tell her everything was okay.
We made it home, but she came
in the house screaming.
They were... the man was
following her everywhere
and he was still trying to...
he was trying to choke her.
NARRATOR:
Sabrina was diagnosed
with schizophrenia.
Now 14, she has been struggling
for two years
to stay in touch with reality.
She still hears
threatening voices,
and hallucinations haunt
her waking hours.
WOMAN:
Sabrina often sees
a black-hooded-dressed figure
that sometimes
will just stare at her,
sometimes it talks to her,
sometimes it tries to touch her,
sometimes it tries to kill her.
Sometimes when she's struggling
with this
they begin almost chanting,
"Kill yourself,
do it, do it, do it."
Come on in.
All right.
Have a seat.
NARRATOR:
At the University
of North Carolina,
researchers are investigating
how hallucinations can overwhelm
the adolescent brain,
and they are testing new drugs
to help treat
these psychotic symptoms.
Could you look right
at keyhole over there?
I'm going to check
your eyes out,
if that's okay.
NARRATOR:
Isaac Wallace began
to hear voices
when he first
went off to college.
As the voices grew
more frightening
and his thoughts more paranoid,
he was finally hospitalized
for his own protection.
WOMAN:
When Isaac walked
in the hospital,
he was completely wrapped up
in hallucinatory experiences
he was having,
the voices he was hearing,
the beliefs he had developed
to explain the voices.
Whenever
I'd hear voices
I'd just completely,
like, block out
what was in the real
world and just think
about, like, what
the voices were saying
and, like, talk to them.
NARRATOR:
The voices that Isaac heard
were disturbing
because they appeared so real,
yet they were produced
by his own flawed brain.
PERKINS:
When you see psychosis
you realize that
we don't hear with our ears;
we hear with our brain.
We don't see with our eyes;
we see with our brain.
And so when the brain misfires
you can have experiences
of hearing voices
that sound just like they're
coming from outside your head.
NARRATOR:
In the normal brain, waves
of sound falling on the ear
travel as electrical
and chemical pulses
to the hearing part of the
brain, the auditory cortex,
generating a surge of signals
that travel to the thinking
regions of the brain
where they are interpreted.
Scientists believe
that in psychosis
the thinking regions fail,
neurons misfire in random
and chaotic ways,
creating sounds that have no
connection to the outside world.
The result: a perception
of sounds that do not exist.
PERKINS:
So when the brain misfires,
when the circuitry in your brain
is out of whack,
it'll be just as if
you're hearing the radio on.
NARRATOR:
Scientists theorize that
psychosis is caused in part
by problems with a chemical
in the brain called dopamine,
one of the brain's
neurotransmitters,
molecules that send messages
from cell to cell
across a tiny gap, the synapse.
In the normal brain,
dopamine acts
by stimulating receptors on
the neuron that is its target
setting off a cascade
of electrical
and chemical reactions.
In the psychotic brain,
for reasons that scientists
are still trying to understand,
the levels of dopamine surge,
overstimulating the receptors,
wreaking havoc
with the brain's ability
to send clear
and accurate signals.
Since the 1950s,
antipsychotic medications
have been standard treatment
for relieving psychosis.
For Isaac,
they have worked wonders.
WALLACE:
I'd say within three weeks
the voices really, like,
they dropped maybe in half
to maybe 75% less
than what I was hearing.
Yeah, it has brought me out
of, like, my own little world
and, you know,
brought me back into reality.
I can hold a job now, and...
I think I can go back
to school as well
because my memory's back
and my concentration is back.
I think I might do better
than I did before.
NARRATOR:
Antipsychotic medications
relieve psychosis
by reducing the impact
of dopamine on the neuron
by clogging
dopamine-sensitive receptors.
With diminished
neuronal stimulation,
psychotic symptoms lessen
and often disappear.
PERKINS:
You know, we were lucky.
We found the right medicine
for Isaac, and at this point
I think he's had
an almost-complete recovery.
He's back to his old self,
his old Isaac.
NARRATOR:
Antipsychotic medications
don't cure schizophrenia,
and Isaac will need to take them
for the rest of his life.
But in some people,
the drugs don't work at all.
Schizophrenia varies
from person to person,
and Sabrina has a more resistant
form of the disease.
MAN:
When Sabrina first became
seriously sick two years ago,
it seemed like we had a hundred
possible medicines to try
and certainly
one of them would work.
And yet we discover
that they haven't worked,
and it's getting
very scary
because we don't
have many left.
And as a parent,
it's incredibly difficult
to watch your child suffer.
But it's also... I see
her courage, I really do.
I see her fighting this
every day
and I'm incredibly
proud of her.
I'll... I'll remember it later.
That's who taught me,
it was my dad and...
NARRATOR:
For Courtney, medications
have helped him pull back
from the emotional void
he once faced.
His thoughts of suicide
have passed.
He still struggles
with his illness,
but he is going on with his life
and has recently
entered college.
HALE-COOK:
I'd rather have lived
the life that I live right now,
as confusing and painful
as it has been,
than to have never
been born at all.
I think he has learned a lot
about how fragile life is.
about what is really important.
NARRATOR:
Every year 300,000 Americans are
diagnosed with schizophrenia.
Most of them first developed
symptoms in their late teens.
But millions more teenagers are
vulnerable to another danger.
CHORUS:
[music] We clap our hands
in the sanctuary... [music]
( clapping )
[music] We clap our hands
to give you the glory... [music]
( clapping )
NARRATOR:
Adolescence is a time
of growing independence.
As the prefrontal cortex
matures,
teenagers are beginning to
explore the world on their own.
CHORUS:
[music] And we will praise you
for the rest of our days... [music]
NARRATOR:
But their judgment and reasoning
are still not fully developed,
which makes it especially risky
when they experiment with
addictive drugs and alcohol.
12½ million American
teenagers suffer
from serious drug abuse problems
or addiction.
HYMAN:
Adolescence is a time
when kids are exposed to all
kinds of influences in the world
some of them terribly negative,
like drugs of abuse.
CHORUS:
[music] Jesus, we give you
the praise... [music]
HYMAN:
Addiction is a disease
of the brain
that affects thinking,
emotion and behavior.
In that sense it's like many
other serious brain diseases,
like depression,
like schizophrenia,
only here the pathogen are
the drugs of abuse themselves
acting on a vulnerable brain.
YOUNG WOMAN:
I never thought
that I would become an addict
or even thought
about being an addict
until I really started
doing coke.
And then it kind
of dawned on me,
"I'm doing cocaine now,
it's not just weed,
"it's not just alcohol,
you know.
This... this is getting
worse and worse."
NARRATOR:
Jessie Galetar began
experimenting with alcohol
when she was 11.
Marijuana followed
shortly after,
and then an array
of other addictive drugs.
By 16, she was addicted
to cocaine.
WOMAN:
She had to have it
to function, she had to have it
to get out of bed.
She couldn't get out of bed
without doing cocaine first.
She couldn't walk
into the school
without having done cocaine
in the parking lot.
And it wasn't fun anymore.
It was just...
she had to do it to live.
I was just, like, "I've got
to do something right now
or I'm going to die"
because I couldn't live
like that anymore.
NARRATOR:
By 17, caught
in a desperate obsession,
Jessie checked into
the Caron Foundation
in eastern Pennsylvania,
a residential drug rehab center.
WOMAN:
Who else in here uses pot a lot?
NARRATOR:
Here teenage addicts try to
regain control over their lives
that have been captured
by addiction.
After a while it was like
instead of me having
the control over the drugs,
it was like the drugs
had control over me.
If I was sick,
I was thinking about dope.
If I was on dope, I was thinking
about how I'm going
to get it again.
And, like, that's all
I thought about all the time.
( ball hits backboard;
ball bouncing )
YOUNG MAN:
One day I was sober--
I didn't have anything to drink
and nothing to smoke--
and I realized it was
the first day in a long time
that I had no chemicals
in my body
and it felt weird,
and I was irritated
and I... it was
the worst day of my life.
You know, I've been here
about a week now,
I'm still not recovered.
I still, every single day,
want to smoke.
And it has been a part of my
life for so long, you know...
NARRATOR:
Addiction used to be viewed
as simply a moral failing,
a weakness of character.
But scientists have begun
to investigate
how addictive substances
fundamentally change the brain,
gradually taking control
over motivation and desire.
Addiction research has focused
on the neural circuitry
in the brain's
"rewards" pathway,
the network of neurons
where our desires arise.
Flowing along this network,
continuously stimulating
our pleasures and appetites,
are the neurotransmitters
that one neuron uses
to talk to another.
Addictive drugs work
by altering the level
of these neurotransmitters
and slyly capturing
the reward pathway.
HYMAN:
All addictive drugs
are Trojan horses.
Every single one of
the chemicals that are addictive
are mimics; that is, they look
like a neurotransmitter,
they look like one of the
chemicals that the brain uses
for nerve cells
to communicate with one another.
NARRATOR:
Many addictive drugs mimic
one of the most powerful
neurotransmitters
in the reward pathway: dopamine.
In the normal brain, dopamine
travels across the synapse,
stimulates receptors
on the target neuron,
and then it is
quickly reabsorbed
by tiny molecular
vacuum cleaners
called dopamine transporters.
But when cocaine is abused,
trillions of cocaine molecules
surge into the synapses,
clogging the vacuum cleaners,
artificially boosting the level
of dopamine in the brain,
producing a cocaine high.
Let's imagine a wonderful
natural reward--
you know,
I go to a restaurant
and have the best
ice cream sundae I've ever had.
You know, I'd have
a certain amount of dopamine
probably being released
in my brain.
But cocaine,
which gets there chemically,
gives your brain,
gives these synapses
more dopamine for
a longer amount of time
than it has ever
experienced before.
Now, with the experience
of your first drug high,
particularly when
it's cocaine and heroin,
watch what happens.
The dopamine levels ascend
above and beyond
those experienced with orgasm,
above and beyond the greatest
physiologic experience
we can have as men and women.
I got so high, and I literally
thought I was floating.
I was just, you know...
( humming )
you know,
going through, you know.
You know, bumping into people
and making jokes and laughing,
and tears were rolling down
my face I was laughing so hard.
JESSIE:
After doing like three or four,
I'd just kind of sit back
and light a cigarette
and it would just, like,
fill me, like, completely,
and like... it was like taking
me away from the world.
INSTRUCTOR:
Once the drugs and the alcohol
are introduced
into the addicted brain,
the natural system is
what we call "down-regulated."
It means that the things
that are supposed to work
for exercise and food
and all the things that are
supposed to make us feel good,
they basically go
into hibernation.
MAN:
You have a feeling
of hopelessness,
such that the only thing
you can possibly do
to have any semblance
of pleasure in your life
is to readminister the drug.
NARRATOR:
The first high
can be exhilarating,
but after repeated drug abuse,
the dark side to addiction
begins to take its toll.
The brain responds
to the repeated use of cocaine
and the dopamine surging
in the synapse
by fighting back, cutting away
receptors on the neuron
that are the dopamine's target.
Without the receptors, dopamine
can't stimulate the neuron,
and the drug high is reduced,
but so is enjoyment
of all normal pleasures as well.
YOUNG MAN:
It tricks my brain, you know.
Uh, it made me think that,
you know... that I was happy,
that I enjoyed my life,
when in fact I really didn't.
When I wasn't high,
I hated my life.
YOUNG WOMAN:
I remember writing diary entries
like "I was in pain,
but still I want to do more
and I can't stop."
And I just wanted
to die all the time.
I didn't even want
to live anymore.
HYMAN:
You know, none of these kids
sat down and said, "Hey,
I want to be a drug addict."
Actually what happened is,
like lots of other adolescents,
they played
what turned out for them
to be a game
of Russian roulette.
There was something
about their genes,
something
about their temperament
that made them vulnerable,
so that when other kids
got away-- often scot-free--
they got hooked.
There was something different
about their brains.
MAN:
We got some alcohol in here
and our job now
is to help you
to consume
this beverage
in about
a ten-minute period.
NARRATOR:
Like cocaine, alcohol is
dangerously addictive.
By their senior year
in high school,
9½ million American teenagers
will have tried it.
So, you've been watching
the sports?
NARRATOR:
At the San Diego
Veterans Hospital,
Marc Schuckit is trying
to understand
what makes some
of these teenagers
more vulnerable to alcohol
than others.
Oh, yeah, sure.
Super, that's great.
NARRATOR:
For volunteers
like 18-year-old Justin
and 21-year-old Elaca,
Schuckit collapses one night
of drinking into ten minutes
and then records
the way their brains respond.
SCHUCKIT:
Alcohol has a huge impact
on brain waves,
and it is indeed one of the ways
that one can measure
how the brain is changing
in the presence of alcohol
or other drugs.
We gave them equivalent amounts
of alcohol per kilogram.
The result of that was
that their blood-alcohol levels
were virtually identical.
What the brain waves show us
is that Elaca is responding more
to the alcohol than Justin.
Her brain waves are being
impacted by the alcohol
significantly more than Justin's
brain waves are being affected.
SCHUCKIT:
So, on a zero-to-36 scale,
how high do you feel?
36.
What do you think
about the slurredness
of your speech?
Is your speech slurred?
Mmm... I don't think so,
( slurring ):
but it's... probably is,
it's probably like 20.
Okay.
And regarding
how drunk
or intoxicated
you feel overall?
36.
SCHUCKIT:
She was having
difficulty concentrating,
was having problems focusing
on exactly what it was
that we were talking about,
and she had some
pretty darn good insight
that she was
feeling pretty high.
And on
a zero-to-36 scale,
how "high"-- using
that term generically,
feeling high or
intoxicated-- are you?
Nothing-- I don't feel
anything really,
like maybe a one.
Okay, how about
how clumsy
you feel you might be?
Nah, zero.
And, uh... problems
where you feel
like you're floating?
Zero.
Got it.
Justin had the same
blood-alcohol level
and when we asked him
how he felt,
he was basically saying,
"I don't feel much."
It was almost close to zero,
very low on the scale.
And all you had to do
was look at him
and you knew
that he was feeling less.
JUSTIN:
Zero.
NARRATOR:
The same blood-alcohol level,
very different reactions.
JUSTIN:
Zero.
SCHUCKIT:
The two people are starting out
their drinking evenings
with basically
different equipment onboard.
Elaca, after one or two drinks,
is likely
to look around and say,
"I'm getting pretty high,
I'd better slow down."
Justin, we would guess,
when he goes to a party,
just having a couple of drinks,
he probably looks around
and says,
"Well, what's the big deal?"
And he's probably more likely
to go on to three, four or five.
Yeah, zero, none.
SCHUCKIT:
Justin gets drunk;
it just takes Justin a lot more
alcohol to get drunk than Elaca.
NARRATOR:
Even though Justin's brain
responds more slowly to alcohol,
he is more likely than Elaca
to become an alcoholic.
Because he is less aware
of alcohol's powerful effect,
he may keep drinking
when Elaca might stop,
exposing his brain to
ever-higher levels of alcohol
and increasing the chance
that he will become addicted.
YOUNG MAN:
You know, I've talked
to kids my age, my size--
six beers
and they're passed out.
For me, six beers, I'm just
starting to get warmed up.
I can drink easily
almost a case of beer to myself.
You know, I have
alcoholism in the
family, you know,
going back generations, and I'm
sure that plays a major role.
SCHUCKIT:
One of the major reasons
why alcohol dependence
is running in families
is because people inherit genes
that impact on
how their brains function.
We found that
a low response to alcohol
is associated
with a high risk for alcoholism
regardless
of your family history.
But if you have both,
a family history of alcoholism
and a low response to alcohol,
your risk is really quite large.
YOUNG MAN:
Either three out of four
or all four of my grandparents
were alcoholics
which increases the probability
of being an alcoholic.
It was just pretty much
people who looked at me
even from when I was little
could... would tell me,
you know, "You're going
to be an alcoholic
when you start drinking."
NARRATOR:
But once teenagers become hooked
by alcohol and drugs
why can't they stop?
How do drugs change the brain
to make recovery
so difficult for many
and impossible for others?
Edward Coleman began using
marijuana when he was 13
and quickly advanced
to abusing other drugs.
By 19, he was a hardened cocaine
addict, living on the edge,
hustling and scamming to feed
his all-consuming habit.
COLEMAN:
I can remember days--
can't go to sleep from thinking
about trying to get high:
What can I do, or where
can I go, or who can I rob
to get money just to get high?
We just have to get
you positioned
in the right way
so you can comfortably
get up on the table here.
NARRATOR:
Dr. Anna Rose Childress has
been studying drug addiction
for over two decades.
CHILDRESS:
You're going
to see some videos.
They could be
nature videos
or scary, or sexy,
or drug-related.
NARRATOR:
Researchers have long observed
that recovering addicts
relapse most often
when they return to their drug-
using neighborhoods and friends.
Childress wondered
if it was these cues
that somehow triggered
an insatiable need for drugs
in a brain changed by addiction.
HYMAN:
Just the reminder of drug use,
just seeing these friends,
seeing a crack pipe,
smelling the smell,
creates this overwhelming sense
of need, of craving
that "The world is
completely out of balance
till I have some cocaine."
NARRATOR:
Childress devised
a simple experiment.
She scanned the brains
of long-term cocaine addicts,
but only after they'd been
drug-free for two weeks.
This would ensure
that the images she captured
were not cocaine's high
but more permanent changes
to the brain.
ANNOUNCER ( in video ):
For their size,
they burn energy...
NARRATOR:
She showed her subjects
a series of video images:
first nature scenes...
ANNOUNCER:
Darting from blossom to blossom,
their lives depend on flowers.
MAN ( in second video ):
I'll let you cook it up
because that way
you can see where...
NARRATOR:
Then images
of explicit drug use.
( man in video sniffing )
MAN ( in video ):
You can already smell it, man.
( man in video
speaking unintelligibly )
NARRATOR:
The two different videos
produced very different activity
in the addicts' brains.
The scans during
the nature video revealed
very little brain activity.
But when the videotape
switched to drug use,
the scans erupted in red,
indicating intense
brain activity.
CHILDRESS:
We could see that the brain
was doing something special
and something different when a
person was in a state of desire
than when they weren't.
It was extremely exciting for us
because it was the first time
really in all of human history
that we'd been able to peek
inside the brain during desire.
And these are images
that were done in
the PET scanner.
NARRATOR:
Childress had captured an image
of how the brain had been
fundamentally altered
to produce a driving hunger
for cocaine.
CHILDRESS:
Well, our patients
describe craving
as the thing that can push them
to do things that they never
imagined that they would do--
to cross their own rules,
their own values,
to put their... not only
their relationships in jeopardy
or their possessions, or their
jobs, but their very lives.
COLEMAN:
It's like being a victim
of a vicious pit bull attack.
Once the dog attacks you
and locks onto you,
he's not letting go.
The only way to get him off
is to kill him
and that's pretty much
how I was looking at it.
The only way to get out
of drug addiction was to die.
NARRATOR:
Despite the craving
carved into his brain,
Coleman was able
to beat his addiction
and he did it in a way
that has intrigued researchers.
Coleman's legs were a casualty
of a stray bullet
in his drug-filled neighborhood.
But this tragedy allowed him
to make a surprising discovery.
He was still using cocaine,
but to calm his paralyzed
but trembling legs,
he began taking the common
muscle relaxant Baclofen.
When he ran out of cocaine,
he was surprised to find
he no longer needed it.
COLEMAN:
As long as I was taking
the Baclofen,
it was blocking my mind
from thinking that
I needed the drugs.
It was blocking that part of me
that thought about it
and wanted it.
NARRATOR:
The Baclofen appeared
to be overriding the craving for
cocaine etched into his brain.
When Coleman reported
his observations to Childress,
she was intrigued
by this homegrown
scientific experiment.
CHILDRESS:
So we offered him a PET scan
and our usual hummingbird video,
cocaine video
with the bet that on Baclofen
that we wouldn't see the hot
spots lighting up in these areas
that are important
for anticipating reward.
Sure enough.
Look, there are
no hot spots.
So for you, watching
the nature video,
your brain didn't
respond very much
differently
when you were watching
the cocaine video.
CHILDRESS:
His two scans are identical.
So the way that he looks
at the nature video,
the way he looks
during the cocaine video--
there are no hot spots.
So it's really encouraging to us
that his description
of how he feels--
that he doesn't feel pulled
and that he feels
as though everything's
in a manageable range--
really matches up
with his brain.
His brain agrees.
NARRATOR:
Baclofen may prove
to be the first medication
to actually curb the insatiable
desire for cocaine
and it is now in early testing
on addicts.
But until medications are
available to fight addiction,
addicts will continue
to struggle
to overcome addiction
on their own.
( young women laughing
and talking )
NARRATOR:
Jessie and these other teenagers
will spend
anywhere from between
three weeks to three months
reclaiming their lives.
And they have learned
important lessons
about how drugs
have changed their brains.
I'm sitting here
and I'm really dwelling on...
( sighs deeply )
the fact that I'm an addict,
and I need... I need help
and I'm not going to be able
to do this by myself,
and I need to do all the things
that they teach me.
And, um... and
it's really hard...
It's really hard, it's scary.
NARRATOR:
The disheartening reality is
that eight out of ten addicts
who leave rehab relapse
and return to their addiction,
sometimes after months
and even years of sobriety.
I'm still terrified
of, like, relapse
and just starting to use again.
And that's actually...
it's kind of good
because I'm less likely
to go back out
if I am scared to death of it.
INSTRUCTOR:
You don't want it too tight.
You just want it so
the helmet's not moving around.
NARRATOR:
The last hurdle many of these
teenagers will face
before leaving rehab
will be an aerial ropes course.
As you notice,
there's two cables,
one on each side, that suspend
the ladder, the rungs.
Okay?
You can't hold on to those.
The only thing
you can hold on to
are those rungs
and your partner.
( young women laughing )
This is not as easy
as it looks.
NARRATOR:
This graduation exercise
symbolizes
the challenge
these teenagers face
in beating their addictions
after their brains
have been distorted by drugs.
( young women shouting
encouragement )
INSTRUCTOR:
Pull, pull, pull, pull, pull.
You got it, ladies.
Nice job, nice job.
HYMAN:
A critical part of the brain
has literally been hijacked
by drugs of abuse.
It's been rewired so that
behavior is now focused
on this life
of obtaining and using drugs.
INSTRUCTOR:
Communication
is the key.
HYMAN:
The behavior
has become automatic
and the trick for the person
who's recovering
is to stop these
automatic responses.
INSTRUCTOR:
Look above you.
What's above you?
There you go.
BERMAN:
What we attempt to do here
is recruit other parts
of your brain
to diminish those
improper messages.
( young women laughing )
Knowing we can't eradicate them,
we attempt to recruit
other soldiers, all right,
other parts of the brain
to help diminish those feelings.
INSTRUCTOR:
Let go, let go of the rope.
Use your partner to stand up.
That's it.
( young women cheering
and clapping )
HYMAN:
If I had to guess,
what we have to shore up
is the prefrontal cortex--
the critical functions
of this prefrontal cortex,
what we call "executive
function": self-control,
the ability to literally
have responsibility for oneself.
YOUNG WOMAN:
Come on, Liz!
HYMAN:
And we can do that
because their whole brain
has not been overthrown
by drugs of abuse.
I really don't
want to do it.
INSTRUCTOR:
Liz, all you've got to do
is reach up, okay?
Grab onto... Chrissie,
and she will help you up.
Don't pull yet.
YOUNG WOMEN:
Come on, Liz,
you can do it.
INSTRUCTOR:
I've got you here
on the rope, too.
I'll pull you off if I do that.
I don't want to do that.
( young women shouting
encouragement )
No! Don't let go
of my hand, Chrissie!
INSTRUCTOR:
You got it.
( young women cheering
and applauding )
INSTRUCTOR:
All right! Yeah!
( young women applauding )
INSTRUCTOR:
Okay, I need you ladies to...
No! No! No!
Hurry up, hurry up.
( young women laughing )
Hurry up, please.
LIZ:
My greatest fear,
which is climbing,
and I worked through
my greatest fear.
I can do anything.
( clapping )
I could do anything.
PERKINS:
Adolescence is one of probably
the most demanding times
in life.
You're learning how to function
as a human in society;
you're beginning
to try and form partnerships
and long-lasting friendships;
you're becoming sexually aware.
WEINBERGER:
And we know that leaving home,
becoming an adult, having
a family, requires a number
of much more complicated
mental, psychological abilities.
HYMAN:
And the organ
of all of these changes
and the way people think
and emote and make judgments
is, after all, their brain.
( car horn honking )
Next time on
The Secret Life of the Brain...
( car horn blaring,
tires screeching )
( crash; siren wailing )
Emotions and the adult brain.
MAN:
Why do we have these emotions?
What are they for?
WOMAN:
There's no empathy or sympathy.
He just can't get that feeling.
WOMAN 2:
Deadness, terror,
distorted time.
I did not want to live.
Next time, the emotional brain.
Take a 3-D animated tour
of the brain
at PBS Online.
Find brain teasers,
take a cognitive test and more
at pbs.org.
The Secret Life of the Brain
is ava